Maternal Health Division
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India
December 2014

Designed and printed with support from UNICEF

Designed by: ​New Concept Information Systems (P) Ltd., New Delhi
communication@newconceptinfosys.com

National Guidelines for
Calcium Supplementation During
Pregnancy and Lactation

Maternal Health Division
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India
December 2014

yo oekZ
lfpo

Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k foHkkx
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;

LOV VERMA
Secretary

Government of India
Department of Health & Family Welfare
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare

Preface
Quality Antenatal Care is the cornerstone to improved maternal health
and a crucial challenge that is faced by every health care setting
especially in a country like ours. An essential measure for overcoming
this challenge is to equip the staff with appropriate knowledge and skill
sets so that they are able to provide the best care possible at the right
time and in the right place.
I am happy to note that the Government of India took a decision to empower and
equip the Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) with appropriate knowledge and skills to
prevent Preeclampsia / Eclampsia with Calcium supplementation during pregnancy
and lactation.
These guidelines have been developed after taking cognizance of scientific evidence
and considerable consultation with domain experts which are expected to serve as
a handy tool for both policy makers and programme managers, giving step by step
guidance on initiating and implementing this strategy. It will also equip the ANMs and
all the frontline health care workers with the ability and knowledge on how to carry
out key activities that will prevent maternal mortality & morbidity due to hypertensive
disorders.
I sincerely hope that these guidelines will be implemented both in letter and spirit
in order to ensure quality ante-natal care services in order to accelerate reduction in
maternal morbidity and mortality

(Lov Verma)

dejk ua 156] ,&Lda/k] fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Room No. 156, A-Wing, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110011
Tele : (O) 011-23061863, Fax : 011-23061252, E-mail : secyhfw@gmail.com

Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh & 110011
Government of India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi - 110011

C.K. Mishra, IAS
Additional Secretary &
Mission Director, NHM
Telefax : 23061066, 23063809
E-mail : asmd-mohfw@nic.in

Dated: 17th November, 2014

Foreword
“A Strategic Approach to Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and
Adolescent Health (RMNCH+A)” in India has brought about a paradigm
shift in the delivery of health care services. However, maternal mortality
still remains a crucial challenge. We stand firmly committed to reducing
maternal mortality & morbidity in India and are making relentless efforts
to overcome this challenge.
As, Programme Managers, we are all aware that one of the leading causes of maternal
mortality is hypertensive disorders during pregnancy which can lead to pre-eclampsia and
a considerable amount of child and maternal morbidity and mortality is associated with
this condition.
It is in this context that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has taken a decision to adopt
a preventive strategy for pregnancy induced hypertensive disorders. Key intervention in this
strategy is universal supplementation of Calcium to all pregnant women across India.
This guideline will be useful for the states in universal supplementation of calcium during
pregnancy and in post-natal period. I am confident that this simple measure will go a long
way in bringing us closer to our goal of reduce maternal mortality and morbidity and the
states as our key partners will implement these guidelines in true letter and spirit.
Since enabling support systems is essential for seamless implementation of this strategy,
I would also request the states to ensure that appropriate mechanisms for training,
monitoring and operationalising of this initiative are put in place at the earliest.

C.K. Mishra

Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh & 110011
Government of India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi - 110011

Dr. RAKESH KUMAR, IAS
JOINT SECRETARY
Telefax : 23061723
E-mail : rk1992uk@gmail.com
E-mail : rkumar92@hotmail.com

Foreword
Majority of deaths due to pre-eclampsia and eclampsia are preventable
with the provision of timely and effective care during pregnancy and child
birth. Optimising health care to prevent and treat women with hypertensive
disorders is a necessary step towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals.
Considering the high prevalence and mortality caused by the hypertensive disorders
amongst pregnant and lactating women in India; need for an additional preventive
strategy was felt. Based on the WHO recommendation and global evidences, the use
of calcium supplementation to pregnant and lactating women for preventing pregnancy
induced hypertensive disorders has now been included in the Government of India’s
ante-natal care (ANC) and post natal care (PNC) package.
Maternal Health Division of MoHFW convened a series of meetings with different experts
and after detailed deliberation drafted the present guidelines to incorporate routine
calcium supplementation during pregnancy and lactation. These guidelines have been
made as simple as possible to facilitate easy implementation.
These guidelines clearly articulate the technical aspects of the use of Calcium to prevent
pre-eclampsia and its effect on maternal and new born health and outline the operational
aspect of rolling out this intervention as a part of the ANC package.
I express sincere appreciation to all the experts who have put their best efforts to draft
these guidelines. I am confident that these guidelines will not only provide direction
to all service providers in implementation but also contribute immensely towards safe
motherhood and new born health in India.

(Dr. Rakesh Kumar)

Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh & 110011
Government of India

Dr. H. BHUSHAN
Deputy Commissioner (MH)
Telefax : 23062930
E-mail : drhbhushan@gmail.com

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi - 110011

Programme Officer’s Message
Maternal Health Division, Department of Health & Family welfare had
come out with comprehensive technical and operational guidelines on
Calcium Supplementation for prevention of hypertensive disorders during
pregnancy. These guidelines have been the result of series of deliberations
with the members of expert group and development partners.
I would like to express that these guidelines would not have been possible without
the constant encouragement from Mr. C.K Mishra, AS & MD & Ms Anuradha Gupta,
Ex AS & MD. Dr. Rakesh Kumar, Joint Secretary (RMNCH+A) headed the expert group
meeting and gave valuable inputs in framing this guideline.

I would like to acknowledge the contribution of all members of the Expert Group
in developing the content of these technical and operational guidelines. I would
also like to acknowledge my colleagues in MH Division especially Dr. Dinesh
Baswal, DC (MH) and development partner’s for their valuable efforts and inputs
in developing this document.
The calcium supplementation needs to be incorporated as part of regular ANC & PNC.
This has a potential to avert large number of maternal deaths due to Eclampsia alone. I
wish success and extend unstinting support towards implementation of this initiative by
the States and UTs.

(Dr Himanshu Bhushan)

List of Contributors
1

Shri C. K. Mishra

AS & MD (NHM), MoHFW

2

Dr Rakesh Kumar

JS (RMNCH+A), MoHFW

3

Dr Himanshu Bhushan

DC (I/c MH), MoHFW

4

Dr Dinesh Baswal

DC (MH), MoHFW

5

Dr V. Seshiah

Diabetes Care Centre, Chennai

6

Dr Rajesh Khadgawat

Add. Prof., Dept. of Endocrinology & Metabolism,
AIIMS, New Delhi

7

Dr Hema Divakar

FOGSI

8

Dr Prema Ramchandran

Nutritional Expert, Hyderabad

9

Dr Abha Singh

HOD OBGY, LHMC, New Delhi

10

Dr Himali H. Sinha

Dept. of OBGY, AIIMS, Patna

11

Dr Aboli Gore

MP- TAST, Bhopal

12

Dr Ratna Kumar

Ex HOD, Institute of OBGYN, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

13

Dr B. Shailaja

Epidemiologist, Andhra Pradesh

14

Dr Genevieve Begkoyian

UNICEF

15

Dr Malalay Ahmadzai

UNICEF

16

Dr Sudha Balakrishnan

UNICEF

17

Ms Vani Sethi

UNICEF

18

Dr Somesh Kumar

Jhpiego

19

Dr Vikas Yadav

Jhpiego

20

Dr Vidushi Kulshreshtha

AIIMS, New Delhi

21

Dr Arunabh Ray

BTAST, Patna

22

Mr K. S. Prasanth

Senior Consultant, NHSRC

23

Dr Manju Chuggani

Principal, Rufaida College Of Nursing, New Delhi

24

Dr Ritu Agrawal

LSTM, New Delhi

25

Dr Sudhir Maknikar

National RMNCH+A Expert, JSI

26

Dr Pushkar Kumar

Lead Consultant, MH, MoHFW

27

Dr Rajeev Agrawal

Senior Mgt. Consultant, MH, MoHFW
National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

vii

28

Dr Ravinder Kaur

Senior Consultant, MH, MoHFW

29

Dr Gulfam Ahmed Hashmi

Regional Coordinator, NRU, MoHFW

30

Dr Sonali Rawal

NHM Consultant, MoHFW

31

Mr Shridhar B. Pandit

PO, NRHM, Maharashtra

32

Dr Neeraj Agarwal

Jhpiego

33

Ms Geeta Sharma

UNICEF

J&K Team
34

Dr Yashpal Sharma

MD, NHM, Govt. of J&K

35

Dr Harjeet Rai

NHM, Govt. of J&K

36

Dr Mushtaq Ahmad Dar

NHM, Govt. of J&K

UP Team
37

Mr Sanjay Prasad

Secretary, Health, Govt of UP

38

Dr Neera Jain

GM, MH, NHM, Govt. of UP

39

Dr Vikas Singhal

NHM, Govt. of UP

40

Dr Sapna Das

NHM, Govt. of UP

41

Dr Pravesh Kumari

NHM, Govt. of UP

42

Dr Ranjana Khare

Senior Gynaecologist, Jhalkaribai Hospital,
Lucknow

KGMU Team, Lucknow

viii

43

Dr Vinita Das

Prof. & Head, Dept. of OBGY, KGMU, Lucknow

44

Dr Anjoo Agarwal

Prof. of OBGY, KGMU, Lucknow

45

Dr Amita Pandey

Assoc. Prof, Dept. of OBGY, KGMU, Lucknow

46

Dr Smriti Agarwal

Asst. Prof. of OBGY, KGMU, Lucknow

47

Dr Madhukar Mittal

Asst. Prof. of Dept. of Medicine, KGMU, Lucknow

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

List of Abbreviations
ANC
ANM
ASHA
AWW
CHC
CI
DH
DPT
GoI
HMIS
IEC
IFA
MC
MCTS
MO
NNM
NNMB
PHC
PNC
PW
RCT
RDA
RR
SBA
SN
UTI
VHND
WHO

Antenatal Care
Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
Accredited Social Health Activist
Anganwadi Worker
Community Health Centre
Confidence Interval
District Hospital
Diphtheria, Pertussis andTetanus
Government of India
Health Monthly Information System
Information Education Communication
Iron Folic Acid
Medical College
Mother and Child Tracking System
Medical Officer
Neonatal Mortality
National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau
Primary Health Centre
Postnatal Care
Pregnant Women
Randomised Control Trials
Recommended Dietary Allowances
Relative Risk
Skilled Birth Attendants
Staff Nurse
Urinary Tract Infection
Village Health Nutrition Day
World Health Organization

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

ix

Contents

1

Introduction

1

2

Evidence

1

3

Technical guidelines for Calcium supplementation in pregnancy

2

4

Operational aspect of the programme

4

5

Key points

8

6

Records & registers

9

7

Monitoring and evaluation

9

8

Outcome measures to be assessed

9

9

Budget

10

10 Annexures
Annexure 1: Dietary Counselling for Calcium in Pregnancy and
Lactation
Annexure 2: Counselling Tips
Annexure 3: FAQs on Calcium Supplementation
Annexure 4: Good Dietary Sources of Calcium

11

11 Bibliography

17

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

13
14
15
16

xi

1

Introduction

Dietary requirement for different nutrients increases during pregnancy and
lactation. The dietary intake of many Indian women, however, is significantly
below recommended dietary requirements. Of these, two most important
nutrients are iron and calcium.
Adequate calcium intake during pregnancy and lactation has the potential
to prevent pre-eclampsia, pre-term birth, neonatal mortality (NNM),
improve maternal bone mineral content, breast milk concentration and bone
development of neonates. While there are national guidelines on maternal
iron supplementation, there are no national guidelines available for calcium
supplementation.There are only some states that have included low-dose
calcium (<1g/d) as part of antenatal and postnatal services.

2

Evidence

2.1 International evidence
Various international evidences are available on the benefit of daily maternal
calcium supplementation during pregnancy. These include the Lancet 2013
series in maternal and child nutrition, several meta-analysis, WHO 2011
and WHO 2013 guidelines and the 2014 Cochrane systematic review. A
summary of these evidences is that the daily intake of at least one gm/
day of calcium in pregnancy after the first trimester reduces the risk of
pre-eclampsia by at least 50%, with an additional 24% reduction in the risk
of pre-term birth.
For prevention of pre-eclampsia, WHO 2 0 1 3 guidelines recommend
inclusion of routine prenatal calcium supplementation in high doses (>1
gm/day), especially in areas where dietary calcium intake is low.

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

1

2.2 National evidence
The daily recommended dietary allowances (RDA) for calcium in pregnancy
and lactation is 1200 mg per day.The National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau
(NNMB) - 2012 data from 10 Indian states shows that the daily calcium
intake during pregnancy and lactation for Indian women is less that 30% of
RDA (which means it is only 400 mg/d).This shows that most pregnant and
lactating women in India have low dietary calcium intake.

2.3 Need for national guidelines
Considering the poor dietary calcium intake among pregnant and lactating
women in India, high prevalence of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy
and to maintain uniformity in dosage of maternal calcium supplementation
across the country, there was an urgent need to formulate our own guidelines
for calcium supplementation during pregnancy. Moreover, there is ample
universal evidence that calcium supplementation in pregnancy reduces
incidence of pre-eclampsia and other hypertensive disorders in pregnancy.
Therefore, an expert group was constituted to deliberate on calcium
supplementation in detail and to formulate guidelines for India. The present
guidelines have been prepared based on the recommendations of these
experts and available national/international evidences.

3

Technical guidelines for Calcium
supplementation in pregnancy

3.1 Target population
All pregnant women in the community.
Individual states are free to implement this programme across the
states in a phased manner.
All health facilities and outreach points in the state/district have to be
covered.
2

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

Aim:

Objective:

To reduce the incidence of
hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy by routine calcium
supplementation
To provide a protocol for
calcium supplementation
and operational details of
this programme

To contribute to the
reduction of maternal
morbidity and mortality

3.2 Protocol for calcium supplementation
All pregnant and lactating women to be counselled about intake of
calcium rich foods.
Oral swallowable calcium tablets to be taken twice a day (total
1g calcium/day) starting from 14 weeks of pregnancy up to six
months post-partum.
One calcium tablet should be taken with the morning/afternoon meal
and the second tablet with the evening/night meal. It is not advisable
to take both calcium tablets together as > 800 mg calcium interferes
with iron absorption. Calcium tablets should not be taken empty
stomach since it causes gastritis.
Calcium and Iron Folic Acid (IFA) tablets should not be taken together
since calcium inhibits iron absorption. IFA tablets should be taken
preferably two hours after a meal.
Each calcium tablet should contain 500 mg elemental calcium and
250 IU vitamin D3. The preferred formulation for calcium is calcium
carbonate. The rationale for inclusion of Vitamin D is to enhance the
absorption of calcium.

3.3 Specifications of calcium & Vitamin D3 from IP
Calcium carbonate salts to be used.
Swallowable tablets of 500 mg elemental calcium and 250 IU Vitamin
D3 in each tablet to be taken with meals two times a day.

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

3

3.4 Side effects & contraindications
None, within the recommended limit (1gm/d).
A small proportion of women may experience mild gastritis so calcium
tablets should be taken with meals.
Excessive consumption of calcium (>3 gm/d) may increase the risk
of urinary stones and Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) and reduce the
absorption of essential micronutrients.

4

Operational aspect of the programme

4.1 Roll- out plan
The programme will be implemented in all states, at all levels of contact
of pregnant women (PW) with the health system, such as Village Health
& Nutrition Days (VHNDs), sub-centres, primary health centres (PHC)
in urban and rural areas, community health centres (CHC), sub-district
hospitals, district hospitals (DH), and medical colleges (MC).
The service provider and programme officer must be oriented and
trained about the programme.

4.2. Strategy for implementation
It is recommended that calcium be given to all PW after the first trimester
till six months after delivery.
During pregnancy, 360 tablets are required per woman (@ 2 tablets
per day from 14 weeks to 40 weeks = 26 weeks = 182 days) and 360
tablets in the first six months of the postnatal period (@ 2 tablets per
day for 6 months).
ANM to distribute calcium tablets along with IFA tablets to all pregnant
women as per the following proposed schedule, which can be adapted
to the state context:

4

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

When

How many

By whom

Where

Second ANC

12 strips (@ 15 ANM
tablets per strip)

ANC clinic/
VHND

Third ANC

12 strips (@ 15 ANM
tablets per strip)

ANC clinic/
VHND

At the time of zero dose of
polio for the infant

12 strips (@ 15 ANM
tablets per strip)

Immunization
clinic/VHND

At the time of third dose of
Diphtheria, Pertussis, and
Tetanus (DPT) for the infant

12 strips (@ 15 ANM
tablets per strip)

Immunization
clinic/VHND

If the woman delivers at home or doesn’t come to the ANC clinic, the ASHA
has the responsibility to deliver the calcium tablets at the beneficiary’s home.
Appropriate counselling of the target group to be done by the designated
counsellor/staff/service provider at the time of distributing the tablets.
Counselling must emphasise the benefits and protocol of calcium intake
including the appropriate time at which to take calcium and iron tablets.
The total number of calcium tablets required for a district should be calculated
accordingly at the district level, after taking into account the total number of
pregnant women registered for ANC and a 10% add on.

4.3. Capacity building of health personnel for
calcium supplementation in pregnancy
Activity
Health personnel

General orientation
Counselling Knowledge of calcium Maintaining
about the programme
and
supplementation,
records and
including awareness and motivation dosage, timing of
follow up
Information Education
administration in
Communication (IEC)
pregnancy

ASHA

√

√

√

√

ANM/SN/LHV

√

√

√

√

MO/ObGyn

√

√

√

√

State/District
Programme Manager
& Facility in charge

√

√

√

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

5

One-day orientation programme, based on the guidelines, should be
organised for the district and block level programme officers. During
this orientation programme, planning for necessary logistics and
training of healthcare workers should also be done.
Ideally, the training of healthcare workers for calcium supplementation
of pregnant women should also be integrated with other training
programmes, such as the training for deworming during pregnancy.
Training for this component should be included in the training
module of ASHAs as well as the training programmes of skilled birth
attendants (SBA).

4.4 Training/ Orientation
Topics for
orientation
General orientation about the programme
including awareness and IEC
Knowledge about the importance of
calcium in the diet, calcium rich food, role
of calcium in prevention of hypertensive
disorders in pregnancy
Benefits of calcium and possible adverse
effects if adequate calcium is not taken
and assurance
How and when to administer calcium
tablets specially in relation to meals and
intake of IFA tablets
Dose and duration of intake during ANC
and postnatal care (PNC)
Importance of regularity and compliance
Maintaining records and follow up

6

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

Health
workers
Programme
manager and
Facility in charge
ASHA
ANM/SN/LHV
MO/Ob-Gyn

Duration

One day orientation
(Either separate or
can be included with
any other training
programme)

Batch size
Districts to be mapped for all delivery points.
All cadres of staff working at different levels of facilities but involved
in providing ANC need to be oriented.
Priority to be given to health personnel of all delivery points for
training and orientation on rotation basis.
Stand-alone training for calcium supplementation might not be
needed, thus, orientation programme can be done during existing
review meetings at states/districts/blocks/PHCs, or it may be combined
with any other training programme.
If separate training is to be organised, one batch can have 50-100
trainees from all cadres.
One batch of trainees will consist of
w Programme Manager
w ANM/SN/LHV
w MO/Ob-Gyn.
District Training-in-charge will accordingly prepare the training plan
and calendar.
ASHAs to be trained separately during any ongoing training
programme.
Training site
Prerequisites
Seminar/Conference Room with a capacity of around 100 participants
Audio visual (AV) aids and other training aids
Any DH/CHC which has the above prerequisites/is able to arrange the
above prerequisites can be chosen as a training site
Trainers
Ob-Gyn/MO/Counsellor to be included as trainers
Half day Training of Trainers (TOT) can be organised for 20-25 trainers
at state level

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

7

Training material
GoI guidelines on calcium supplementation
Any other teaching or training material synchronised with GoI
guidelines
Training methodology
Job aids/posters/handouts Presentations

4.5 Community linkages
State contextualisation of the national guidelines during state level
meeting
Inclusion of calcium in antenatal and postnatal services protocol/
package
Inclusion of calcium in the essential drug list and sub-centre kit
Development of state-specific procurement guidelines
Appropriate media and IEC campaign to increase awareness about the
programme on a periodic basis
Availability of calcium at all chosen facilities and availability at subcentre
Inclusion of calcium supplementation indicator in programme
monitoring in Health Monthly Information System (HMIS)/Mother &
Child Tracking System (MCTS)

5

Key points
Supplementation of calcium to all pregnant women after the 1st
trimester and continue till 6 months postpartum
Calcium carbonate salts to be used
Swallowable tablets of 500 mg elemental calcium and 250 IU
Vitamin D3 in each tablet to be taken with meals twice a day
IFA tablets to be taken at least 2 hours after meals

8

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

6

Records & registers
Appropriate entries should be made in the ANC card of the pregnant
woman about calcium supplementation
A column should be added in the ANC register to record calcium
supplementation given to pregnant women.This component should be
made a part of regular monthly ANC reports sent by various levels
Reporting on calcium supplementation during pregnancy should be
made a part of reporting under the HMIS, MCTS Reproductive Child
Health (RCH) portal

State and district programme managers to ensure
Constant supply of calcium and its distribution
Reflecting adequate budget in Programme Implementation Plan (PIP)
and ensuring timely release of funds
Monitoring outcome and progress

7

Monitoring and evaluation
Monitoring of calcium supplementation during pregnancy should
be made a part of the existing visits for monitoring ANC by various
supervisors and should be included in their checklist
ASHAs to monitor compliance through home visit
ANM to monitor compliance during ANC and PNC

8

Outcome measures to be assessed
Number/Percentage of ANC who have received calcium supplementation
in the reporting month out of the total ANC
Number/Percentage of PNC who have received calcium supplementation
in the reporting month out of the total PNC
Number/Percentage of PW having hypertensive disorder of pregnancy
in the reporting month out of total deliveries
National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

9

9

Budget
Infrastructure: Any additional infrastructure not required
Human resource: No separate human resource required
Cost of calcium tablets can be reflected under Janani Shishu Suraksha
Karyakram (JSSK)

Budget estimates and provision for calcium tablets needs to be done
by the state/district programme officer
a. It is estimated that each pregnant woman will take Tab. calcium after
the 1st trimester. Every pregnant woman will be provided two calcium
tablets daily.
b. Calcium tablets will be given for six months during the ANC period
and for six months during lactation. Thus, every woman will need 720
tablets. Each tablet will contain 500 mg elemental calcium and 250
IU Vitamin D3.
c. So the budget provision needs to be made accordingly.
Training:
One day orientation/training can be organised. Stand-alone training is not
required. This can be part of any other ongoing training or can be held
during state/district/block review meetings

10

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

10 Annexures
Annexure 1: Dietary Counselling for Calcium in
Pregnancy and Lactation

13

Annexure 2: Counselling Tips

14

Annexure 3: FAQs on Calcium Supplementation

15

Annexure 4: Good Dietary Sources of Calcium

16

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

11

CALCIUM

Annexure 1: Dietary Counselling for Calcium in Pregnancy
and Lactation
Improve Calcium and Vit D uptake by

Drink one glass of milk everyday

Have one cup of curd everyday

Take morning sunlight everyday

Must take green leafy vegetables

Take one cup ragi everyday

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

13

Annexure 2: Counselling Tips
Supplementation of calcium to all pregnant women after 1st trimester
Calcium supplementation leads to maternal and fetal wellbeing
Oral swallowable calcium tablets to be taken twice a day (total 1gm
calcium/day) starting from 14 weeks of pregnancy up to 6 months
post-partum.
Calcium tablets should be taken, one with morning/afternoon meal
and second with evening/night meal.
Both calcium tablets are not to be taken together, it interferes with
iron absorption.
Calcium tablets should not be taken empty stomach since it causes
gastritis.
Calcium and IFA tablets should not be taken together since calcium
inhibits iron absorption.
IFA tablet should be taken preferably two hours after meal.

Two tablets of calcium per day keep the mother and child healthy!

14

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

Annexure 3: FAQs on Calcium Supplementation
Q 1. Why is it necessary to consume calcium?
Answer: Consumption of calcium is necessary for you and your child’s health.
It will help reduce the possibility of high blood pressure in pregnancy related
complications. High blood pressure is dangerous for both mother and child.
Calcium is also important for the growth of bones and teeth of your child.
Q 2. What should we eat to get calcium in our diet?
Answer: Calcium is found in abundance in:
w

Milk and milk products such as cheese and curd.

w

Green leafy vegetables such as spinach and fenugreek.

w

Sweets made of sesame seeds and ragi.

Q 3. Do we still need to take calcium tablet?
Answer: A woman needs a lot of calcium during pregnancy, which she can’t
get from the food items she consumes.Therefore, it is necessary to supplement
calcium tablet along with calcium rich food in pregnancy.
Q 4: When should we start consuming calcium and for what
duration?
Answer: Two calcium tablets per day should be consumed from fourth month
of pregnancy up to six months after delivery.
Q 5: What precautions should be taken while taking calcium
tablet?
Answer: Calcium tablets should not be taken along with iron tablet. It should
be taken with food ideally.

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

15

Annexure 4: Good Dietary Sources of Calcium

16

Food example

Amount

Calcium in
milligrams

Milk

1 Cup

580

Butter Milk

1 Cup

232

Yogurt

1 Cup

452

Cheese

1 cubic inch

129

Ice-cream

1 Cup

272

Sweet Potatoes

1 Cup

50-100

Green Beans

1 Cup

50-100

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

11 Bibliography
1.

Betrán AP, Wojdyla D, Posner SF, Gülmezoglu AM. National estimates
for maternal mortality: an analysis based on the WHO systematic
review of maternal mortality and morbidity. BMC Public Health 2005;
5:131.

2.

Clark SL, Belfort MA, Dildy GA, Herbst MA, Meyers JA, Hankins GD.
Maternal death in the 21st century: causes, prevention, and relationship
to cesarean delivery. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
2008; 199(1):36.e1–e5.

3.

Khan KS, Wojdyla D, Say L, Gulmezoglu AM, Van Look PF. WHO
analysis of causes of maternal death: a systematic review. Lancet
2006; 367:1066-74.

4.

NHMRC. NHMRC Report on Maternal Deaths in Australia 1988-1990.
Canberra: Government Publishing Service, 1993.

5.

Langenveld J, Ravelli AC, vanKaam AH, van der Ham DP, van Pampus
MG, Porath M, et al. Neonatal outcome of pregnancies complicated
by hypertensive disorders between 34 and 37 weeks of gestation: a 7
year retrospective analysis of a national registry. American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 2011; 205(6):540.e1–540.e7.

6.

Ozkan H, Cetinkaya M, Koksal N, Ozmen A, Yildiz M. Maternal
preeclampsia is associated with an increased risk of retinopathy of
prematurity. Journal of Perinatal Medicine 2011; 39(5):523–7.

7.

Villar J, Say L, Shennan A, Lindheimer M, Duley L, Conde Agudelo A,
et al. Methodological and technical issues related to the diagnosis,
screening, prevention and treatment of preeclampsia and eclampsia.
International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics 2004; 85 (Suppl 1):
S28–S41.

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

17

8.

Chhabra S, Kakani A. Maternal mortality due to eclamptic and noneclamptic hypertensive disorders: a challenge. J Obstet Gynaecol.
2007 Jan; 27 (1):25-9.

9.

Villar J, Ezcurra EJ, Gurtner de la FuenteV, Campodonico L. Preterm delivery
syndrome: the unmet need. Research and Clinical Forums 1994; 16:9–39.

10. Kazerooni T, Hamze-Nejadi S, KazerooniT, Hamze-Nejadi S. Calcium to
creatinine ratio in a spot sample of urine for early prediction of preeclampsia. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics 2003;
80:279–83.
11. Kumru S, Aydin S, Simsek M, Sahin K, Yaman M, Ay G. Comparison of
serum copper, zinc, calcium, and magnesium levels in pre-eclamptic
and healthy pregnant women. Biological Trace Element Research
2003; 94:105–12.
12. Kisters K, Barenbrock M, Louwen F, Hausberg M, Rahn KH, Kosch
M. Membrane, intracellular, and plasma magnesium and calcium
concentrations in preeclampsia. American Journal of Hypertension
2000; 13:765–9.
13. Duvekot EJ, de Groot CJ, Bloemenkamp KW, Oei SG. Pregnant
women with a low milk intake have an increased risk of developing
preeclampsia. European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and
Reproductive Biology 2002; 105:11–4.
14. Belizan JM, Villar J, Repke J. The relationship between calcium intake
and pregnancy-induced hypertension: up-to-date evidence. American
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 1988; 158:898–902.
15. Villar J, Belizan JM, Repke J. The effect of calcium supplementation on
the incidence of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and prematurity.
7th World Congress of Hypertension in Pregnancy; 1990; Perugia,
Italy. 1990:54.

18

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

16. Villar J, Belizan JM, Repke JT. Does calcium supplementation reduce
pregnancy-induced hypertension and prematurity? Advances in
the prevention of low birthweight; 1988 May 8-11; Cape Cod,
Massachusetts. 1998:187–95.
17. Villar J, Repke JT. Calcium supplementation during pregnancy may
reduce preterm delivery in high-risk populations. American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 1990; 163:1124–31.
18. Repke J, Villar J, Bergel E, Belizan JM. The effect of iron absorption
in patients receiving calcium supplementation. 9th Annual Meeting
of the Society of Perinatal Obstetricians; 1989 February 1-4; New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA. 1989:512.
19. Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah ÁN, Duley L Calcium supplementation
during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders and related
problems. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 8.
Art. No.: CD001059. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001059.pub3.
20. Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah ÁN, Duley L, Torloni MR, Calcium
supplementation during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive
disorders and related problems (Review). Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 6.
21. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) Survey, Rural-Third
Repeat Survey 2011-12
22. V. Bhatia: Dietary calcium intake - a critical reappraisal: Indian J Med
Res 127, March 2008, pp 269-273
23. World Health Organization Guideline: Calcium supplementation in
pregnant women, 2013
24. Holick MF. Vitamin D deficiency. N Engl J Med 2007; 357:266–81.

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

19

25. National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplements. Vitamin
D. Available at: http://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/list-all/VitaminD.
Retrieved December 16, 2010.
26. Sachan A, Gupta R, Das V, Agarwal A, Awasthi PK, Bhatia V (2005).
High prevalence of vitamin D deficiency among pregnant women and
their newborns in northern India. Am J ClinNutr 81, 1060–1064.
27. Sahu M, Bhatia V, Aggarwal A, Rawat V, Saxena P, Pandey A et al.
(2008). Vitamin D deficiency in rural girls and pregnant women
despite abundant sunshine in northern India. ClinEndocrinol,doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03360.
28. Vitamin D: screening and supplementation during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 495. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists. Obstet Gynecol 2011; 118:197–8.
29. NICE Public Health Guidance 27 Dietary interventions and physical
interventions for weight management before, during and after
pregnancy. July 2010

20

National Guidelines for Calcium Supplementation
During Pregnancy and Lactation

Maternal Health Division
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India
Nirman Bhawan
New Delhi-110011
Website: www.mohfw.gov.in & www.nhm.gov.in

